Canadian Cadet Organization Biathlon Championship Series
AIR RIFLE / RUN AND SHOOT SPECIFIC RULES – RCSU(A)
Section 3
Rule
ALL

Original
Any reference to skiing or ski trails

ALL

Any reference to dimensions or measurements
given throughout

Amendment / Clarification
All references to skiing and ski trails are understood
to mean running and running trails.
Dimensions or measurements are subject to scaling
and adjustment to account for the differences
between an air rifle run and shoot event and a
skiing biathlon with .22 rifles.
Unless explicitly stated in this document, any
dimension or measurement in the rulebook is
subject to adjustment. Any adjustments pertinent
to the competition (trail length, penalty loop
length, etc.) must be communicated in the
competition invitation.
Stage 2 – No change.

1.3.10 Competition Specifications

As per Table 1

1.4.8.1.3.c Adult Coaches

Stage 3 – Race specifications to be communicated
in the Invitation for the applicable Provincial
Championship
… “Before moving the rifle the coach must ensure
… “Before moving the rifle the coach must ensure
the bolt is to the rear, the magazine is removed and the bolt is to the rear, the pump lever is opened,
the rifle is clear and he must keep the muzzle
and the rifle is clear and he must keep the muzzle
pointing up.” …
pointing up.” …

1.8.2.1 On the Shooting Range

Assistance prohibited within 10m of the shooting
range.

The remainder of the rule remains unchanged.
No change to this measurement. Rule is still
applicable exactly as written.

1.8.2.2 On the Course

3.3.12 Ski Test Area
3.4.2.1 Shooting Distance

3.4.3.1 Shooting Lanes

Pacing prohibited within 100m of range or
start/finish area, and permitted up to a maximum
distance of 50m on other sections of the course.
The distance between the front edge of the
shooting ramp and the line of targets must be 50 m
+/ - 1 m (Smallbore) and 10 m +/- 0.2 m (Air Rifle).
Every shooting lane must be at least 2.75 m but
not more than 3 m wide.

No change to this measurement. Rule is still
applicable exactly as written.
Not applicable
No change. This measurement is not subject to
adjustment.

Every shooting lane must be at least 1.25 m but
not more than 1.5 m wide.
Marking may be using any appropriate means
(flagging tape, paint, etc.)

4.2.3.c Finish Inspection and Rifle
Check
8.2.2.2.c Patrol Race

that the rifle trigger resistance is at least 0.5 kg

8.2.2.2.e Patrol Race

Missed shot penalty is a 150m penalty loop (other
than final bout)

… “The competitor who is shooting on this set of
targets must first open the bolt and lower their
rifle.” …

8.4.2 Use of a magazine

8.5.2 Loading and Unloading

… “To insert a magazine containing bullets into the
rifle is part of the loading procedure.”…

T-Posts are recommended, but not required.
that the rifle trigger resistance is at least 3.5 lbs
(1.59 kg).
No change. The only requirements are to open the
bolt and lower the rifle. Since the magazine would
not be removed, and safety catch would not be
engaged, there is no requirement to open the
pump lever or engage the safety catch. Entirety of
the rule to be interpreted / applied exactly as
written.
Penalty may vary – to be communicated in the
competition invitation.
Not applicable. Magazines (5 round clip) are
prohibited. Use of a 5 round clip would result in a
10 minute penalty (5.11.c).
Pumping of the rifle is part of the loading
procedure. In addition to maintaining control, rifles
must also be unloaded during pumping, with the
bolt fully to the rear. Pellets may only be inserted,
and bolt closed, after pumping. Failure to load in

the correct sequence will result in a 2 minute
penalty per occurrence.

8.5.2.1 Safety Check on the Range Rifles must be unloaded after each shooting bout –
after Shooting
that is, no round may be left in the chamber or in
the inserted magazine. However, competitors are
permitted to leave the empty magazine in the rifle
after the last shot. At the end of training,
competitors must perform a safety check before
leaving the shooting range by opening the bolt and
removing the inserted magazine, with the barrel
pointed toward the target or upward. Competitors
must also remove all ammunition from both the
stock and the magazines before leaving the
shooting range.

Remainder of the rule remains unchanged.
Rifles must be unloaded after each shooting bout
– that is, no round may be left in the chamber
and bolt must be opened. However, competitors
are permitted to leave the pump lever closed
after the last shot. At the end of training,
competitors must perform a safety check before
leaving the shooting range by performing a
dryfire, followed by opening the bolt and pump
lever, with the barrel pointed toward the target
or upward. Competitors must also remove all
ammunition from both the stock and the
magazines before leaving the shooting range.

(Note that dryfire portion only applies at the end
of training, ie, not following each competition
bout.)
Section 5
Rule
5.5.e Two Minute Penalty

5.5.l Two Minute Penalty

Original
During the Patrol competition, a competitor cross
fires on the other set of targets assigned to the
patrol before hitting all five targets in his lane, or
before their team member has opened their bolt
and lowered their rifle;
No rule previously – new rule added

Amendment / Clarification
No Change. Based on 8.2.2.2.c being implemented
in the same manner, no penalty will be imposed
should the pump lever not be opened.

Improper air rifle loading procedure (pumping with
bolt closed) – 2 minute penalty

Annex C – Range Procedures
Rule
1.1 Procedures

Original
…“After firing the last shot of each bout the
competitor must open the action and place the rifle
on the firing point mat,”…

Amendment / Clarification
…“After firing the last shot of each bout the
competitor must open the bolt and place the rifle
on the firing point mat,”…
The implication is that only the bolt is required to
be opened, and not the pump lever.

1.2 Penalty

“If the rifle is left with the action not opened,
each violation shall result in a two minutes
penalty…”

1.4 Safety Check

“The competitor’s coach is responsible for
performing the safety check on the rifle before it is
moved to another location – by confirming that
there is no inserted magazine, that the action has
been opened, and that there is no round in the
chamber.”

2.1 Rack to Rack Carry
Procedures
2.2.2

2.2.3 Prone Shooting

Remainder of the rule remains unchanged
“If the rifle is left with the bolt not opened, each
violation shall result in a two minutes penalty…”

No penalty applied for not opening pump lever.
“The competitor’s coach is responsible for
performing the safety check on the rifle before it is
moved to another location – by confirming that the
pump lever is open, that the bolt has been opened,
and that there is no round in the chamber.”
Not applicable.

For each shooting bout, the coach will provide the
competitor with a full magazine along with the
rifle. Magazines may be provided on the rifle’s
magazine rail (if equipped) for either standing or
prone shooting, placed on the mat for prone
shooting or handed to the athlete for standing
shooting.
…“After firing the last shot of each bout the
competitor must open the action and place the rifle
on the firing point mat, with the barrel pointing

For each shooting bout, the coach will provide the
competitor with a bowl containing the required
number of pellets. Magazines may be provided on
the rifle’s magazine rail (if equipped) for either
standing or prone shooting, placed on the mat for
prone shooting or handed to the athlete for
standing shooting.
…“After firing the last shot of each bout the
competitor must open the bolt and place the rifle
on the firing point mat, with the barrel pointing

toward the targets, and then exit the firing point
and the range in the normal manner.”

toward the targets, and then exit the firing point
and the range in the normal manner.”
The implication is that only the bolt is required to
be opened, and not the pump lever.

2.2.4.2 Standing Shooting

2.3.1 Penalties

… “After firing the last shot of each bout the
competitor must perform a safety check, leave
the action open and wait for his / her coach.” …
Any violation during the above procedures will lead
to a 2-minute penalty imposed by the Competition
Jury.

Remainder of the rule remains unchanged
… “After firing the last shot of each bout the
competitor must perform a safety check, leave
the bolt open and wait for his / her coach.” …
No change. This implies that penalties will be
applied for not opening the bolt, however a
competitor not opening the pump lever shall not
be penalized.

