CCOMCS RULEBOOK
SUMMARY OF AMENDMENTS
26 SEPTEMBER 2018


In order to further align our rulebook with the International Sport Shooting Federation
(ISSF) rulebook, we recommend changing all reference from “Zeroing” to “Sighting”



To provide greater clarity for competition staff at all Stages, but particularly at Stage 2, an
amendment to Rule 1 (General) was recommended to seek guidance from the Regional
Marksmanship OPI in instances that were not explicitly detailed in the CCOMCS rulebook.
Proposed amended wording as follows:
o 1 (General)
In these Rules, “Competitor” is a generic term and refers to male and/or female
cadets who are competing as appropriate.
During Matches, the Jury must decide all cases that are not provided for in these
Rules.
If in doubt, guidance shall be sought from the Regional Marksmanship OPI prior
to the Competition.
Unless otherwise specified in these Rules, capitalized words used in these Rules
shall have the meaning detailed in the Glossary.



Rule 6.3 was reviewed and amended to provide greater clarity in the instance of a
Competitor having to wear a cast or a brace on any part of their body, due to injury.
Proposed amended wording as follows:
o 6.3. The use of any special devices, means or garments that immobilize or unduly
reduce the flexibility of the Competitor’s legs, body or arms is prohibited in order
to ensure that the performance skills of the Competitors are not artificially
improved. All marksmanship clothing must be made of soft flexible and pliable
material that does not become stiffer, thicker or harder under commonly
accepted shooting conditions. The use of adhesives or other materials on
equipment, which provides an advantage to a Competitor, is prohibited. A cast
or non-flexible brace on any part of the body may constitute artificial support.
To request consideration for a Competitor to participate in Stage 2, 3 or 4 of the
CCOMCS while wearing a cast or non-flexible brace, details of the injury or
condition (including a photograph of the cast or non-flexible brace) shall be
provided to the Regional Marksmanship OPI NLT one (1) week in advance of the
competition. After consultation and clearance by the RCMLO, the OPI may
provide approval to compete.



Rule 6.3.9 has been reviewed and amended to not be as restrictive as to what model of
buttplates can be used that comply with the CCOMCS rulebook. This will also impact Rule
5.3.2f, which refers to approved modifications to the rifle. Proposed amended wordings
as follows:
o 5.3.2f. installing an approved adjustable butt plate (Rule 6.3.9). The butt plate
can be adjusted IAW Rule 6.3.9.
o 6.3.9. The use of an adjustable butt plate is permitted. The butt plate may be
adjustable up or down and the shape of the butt plate may be slightly rounded
to offer some support in the shoulder. However, turning the butt plate on the
horizontal axis is not permitted and only the complete butt plate (not part) may
be turned on the vertical axis. The use of a hook on the butt plate that provides
extra support and/or stability is prohibited. The butt plate may not be modified
by the use of adhesives or other materials that will provide an advantage to the
Competitor.



It became apparent that there is currently no rule which allows for the use of measuring
tape by Competitors to have consistent feet placement while firing in the standing
position. Measuring tape is permitted in ISSF competitions and therefore a rule is
required to provide clarity for competitors who wish to use this devise. Proposed rule
addition as follows:
o 6.3.11. Measuring Tape
The use of Measuring Tape, either flexible or rigid, to determine foot placement
while firing in the standing position is permitted. The measuring tape may not
be placed under the foot while firing.



Rules 7.4.6.2 and 7.4.6.3 were reviewed to discuss the allowance for Coaches to prevent
Competitor’s from viewing the monitor if they so desire while firing at Stage 3 or 4.
Responsibility for changing from Sighting Mode to Match Mode still lies with the
Competitor but the Competitor and Coach must ensure that the target is switched from
SIGHTING to MATCH mode and must ensure that the display screen is visible to Range
Officials at all times. Proposed amended wording as follows:
o 7.4.6.3. Competitors shall not obscure the monitor or any part of the screen.
The whole screen must be visible to the Officials. If the Competitor or Coach
does not wish to have the monitor in their field of view, they may move the
screen but it must remain in clear sight for the Range Officials when viewing
from behind.



It was observed that a shooting mat was not included in the list of items that could be
forward of the firing line when a Competitor was firing in the prone position in Rule
15.3.2. Proposed amended wording as follows:
o 15.3.2. Firing Line
When in the firing position, no portion of a Competitor may touch the ground in
front of the firing line. If the firing line is designated with a piece of tape, the

edge closest to the Competitors will be considered the firing line. A Competitor’s
equipment may be placed forward of this line. A Competitor’s equipment
includes their shooting mat, spotting scope, rifle rest, pellets, pellet dish, paper
target, SIUS controller with screen and notebook.


Rules 16.1.2 and 16.1.3 were reviewed and amended to clarify the rule regarding allowing
Competitors to return to Sighting shots during a Match, while firing on electronic targets.
Proposed amended wording as follows:
o 16.1.2 When firing on electronic targets, the Competitor may return to zeroing
from Match Mode in the event of a rifle malfunction (Rule 5.4). An additional
five (5) minutes of time may be granted IAW Rule 5.4.4.
o 16.1.3 When firing on electronic targets, with the approval of a range official, the
Competitor may request to return to Sighting Mode from Match Mode at any
time. This includes the event of a suspected rifle malfunction for the purpose of
diagnosing the suspected malfunction. No additional time will be permitted for
these Sighting shots.



Rule 17.3 was reviewed and amended to better reflect the current course of fire that may
occur at Stages 2, 3 and 4. Note that we recommend that the current Rule 17.3.1d be
replaced by the proposed Rule 17.3.1d indicated below. We also recommend that the
current Rule 17.3.1.1 be deleted as the revised Rule 17.3.1 simplifies and adequately
details how ties should be broken at all CCOMCS competitions. Proposed amended
wording as follows:
o 17.3.1 Individual Competitors
Ties will be broken in the following order for a match:
a. The highest score of the last ten (10) shot series, working backwards by 10
shot series as many times as is required to break the tie;
b. The highest number of tens (10), nines (9), eights (8), etc.;
c. The highest number of tens (10) which do not touch the nine (9) ring; and
d. When decimal scoring is used, ties will be broken by the highest score of the
last ten shot series (decimal scores) and then by comparing decimal scores
on a shot-by-shot basis beginning with the last shot, then the next to last
shot, etc.
o 17.3.2 Teams
For Team Matches, ties will be broken by totalling the results of the top four (4)
Competitors of a Team and following the procedures for breaking individual ties
(Rule 17.3.1). If two Competitors are tied for the lowest score in a particular
Team Match, the tie will be broken by following the procedure for breaking
individual ties (Rule 17.3.1) and the lowest score will be dropped. Then, the
Team Match tie will be broken by following the procedure for breaking an
individual tie.



Rule 23.7.2 was reviewed and amended to reflect the fact that Regional Marksmanship
Coordinators may not necessarily be present at Stage 4. Proposed amendment as
follows:
o 23.7.2. The Jury of Appeal for Stage 4 of the CCOMCS shall be composed of a
minimum of three (3) of the Regional/National Coordinators in attendance. If
there are not three Regional/National Coordinators present, the Jury of Appeal
shall consist of the host Region Coordinator, the Chair of the Marksmanship
Rules Committee and the National Coordinator. This group shall meet via
teleconference as soon as is reasonably possible to rule on any issues that may
arise.

